Ukraine was attacked through multiple borders, the Ukrainian state border service said early Thursday.

At about 5:00 a.m., the state border of Ukraine in the area with the Russian Federation and the Republic of Belarus was attacked by Russian troops supported by Belarus, the service said. 

It added that attacks are being carried out in Luhansk, Sumy, Kharkiv, Chernihiv and Zhytomyr regions — areas on the eastern and northern borders of Ukraine. The attacks are targeting border units, border patrols and checkpoints using artillery, heavy equipment and small arms, the border service said.

In addition, the attack takes place from the Autonomous Republic of Crimea side, said the service.

Ukraine is firing back: It added that border guards, along with Ukraine’s Armed Forces and National Guard, are firing at the enemy depending on the situation on the border.
CNN reporters and witnesses in cities across Ukraine have reported hearing explosions in the early hours of Thursday.

Here’s where:

Kyiv: CNN reporters in Ukraine’s capital heard explosions from the east in the direction of the city’s international airport. Social media users reported hearing several explosions in the Boryspil area to the east of the capital, where the international airport is located about 25 kilometers (15 miles) from the city. CNN has not confirmed that the airport has been targeted.  
Kharkiv: A CNN team in Ukraine’s second biggest city, in the northeast of the country, heard a steady stream of loud explosions.
Kramatorsk: Two people in the eastern city, located about 120 kilometers (75 miles) north of separatist-held Donetsk, told CNN they heard at least two massive explosions.
Dnipro: A resident of the central city told CNN they had heard a few explosions.
Mariupol: Two residents told CNN they heard explosions east of the city, which is located in the southeast of the country.
Odessa: A CNN team in the Black Sea port city heard two groups of explosions about 20 minutes apart. 
Zaporizhzhia: A CNN team in the southeastern city said they heard at at least one very distant explosion.
Additionally, a CNN team in the Russian city of Belgorod, about 80 kilometers (50 miles) north of Kharkiv, said they heard a regular stream of thuds that sounded like outgoing artillery fire.
The European Union’s High Representative Josep Borrell tweeted early Thursday morning, saying, We strongly condemn Russia’s unjustified attack on Ukraine. 

In these dark hours, our thoughts are with Ukraine and the innocent women, men and children as they face this unprovoked attack and fear for their lives, Borrell said. We will hold the Kremlin accountable.

Charles Michel, president of the European Council, posted the same tweet minutes before Borrell.
Ukraine’s Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba urged the world to act immediately in response to Russia’s military operation in the country.

In a tweet on Thursday morning, Kuleba wrote:

The world must act immediately. Future of Europe & the world is at stake. To do list: 
1. Devastating sanctions on Russia NOW, including SWIFT
2. Fully isolate Russia by all means, in all formats 
3. Weapons, equipment for Ukraine 
4. Financial assistance 
5. Humanitarian assistance
A photo provided by the Ukrainian President’s office appears to show an explosion in the country’s capital, Kyiv, early Thursday morning.

CNN teams in Kyiv have been hearing explosions near the capital since Russian President Vladimir Putin announced his military operation in Ukraine.

CNN also heard air sirens sounding for several minutes in Kyiv around 7 a.m. local time (12 a.m. ET), which could be heard across the city. CNN teams did not see or hear incoming fire.

The mayor of the central Ukrainian city of Dnipro on Thursday reassured citizens, telling them not to panic following Russian President Vladimir Putin’s announcement of a military operation in eastern Ukraine.

In a post on his official Facebook page, Dnipro Mayor Borys Fylatov said the city has everything in order.

Countrymen, please don’t panic. Soon, when the exact level of threat is clear for Dnipro — I will keep you updated. Believe me, no one could believe in such a level of cynicism, but everything is in order. Let’s keep in touch. God and Truth is behind us. Fylatov posted.

Some context: A Dnipro resident earlier told CNN they had heard a few explosions in the city.
The Russian military released a statement Thursday claiming it was not targeting Ukrainian cities, as CNN teams on the ground report explosions around the country. 

The Russian Armed Forces are not launching any missile or artillery strikes on the cities of Ukraine. High-precision weapons destroy military infrastructure: military airfields, aviation, air defense facilities of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, the statement read. The civilian population is not at risk. 

CNN teams on the ground have reported explosions around Ukraine and outside of the Donbas region, where Putin announced a special military operation in the early hours of Thursday.
Though there have been several explosions reported around the Ukrainian city of Kramatorsk, it is currently calm and people are going to work as the sun rises, a local official said. 

There were two explosions in Kramatorsk about 5 a.m. local time (10 p.m. ET) and a few more just minutes ago, according to Tatanya Ignachenko, the press secretary of the civil-military administration Donetsk Oblast.
The United States and its allies are planning on Thursday to trigger the full scale of sanctions against Russia that have been discussed over the past several weeks, according to a senior Biden administration official.

While the official declined to lay out specifics, the US has planned to target Russia’s two largest banks, as well as other financial firms, and has prepared to deploy export controls to cut off Russian access to critical Western technology for entire Russian economic sectors.

Additional members of Russian President Vladimir Putin’s inner circle and their families will also be targeted.

Discussions are ongoing late this evening between US and European officials about the final shape of the package, the official said. It will also be a topic of discussion at the virtual G7 meeting scheduled for Thursday morning, the official said.

US officials also remain on high alert for any cyber activity targeting key domestic targets including banks and critical infrastructure, the official said.
China’s ambassador to the United Nations, Zhang Jun, called on all parties involved in the Ukraine-Russia crisis to stay cool headed and rational.

It is especially important at the moment to avoid fueling tensions, Zhang said at an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council on Wednesday night.

All parties concerned should exercise restraint and avoid the further escalation of tensions, he said, adding that China believes the door to a peaceful solution to the Ukraine issue is not fully shut.

China will continue to promote peace talks in its own ways and welcomes and encourages all efforts aimed at a diplomatic solution, Zhang said. 
In a tweet early Thursday morning, NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg condemned Russia’s reckless attack on Ukraine, which puts at risk countless civilian lives.

This is a grave breach of international law & a serious threat to Euro-Atlantic security. NATO Allies will meet to address Russia’s renewed aggression, Stoltenberg added.
Speaking to Fox News late Wednesday, former US President Donald Trump called Russia’s military operation in Ukraine a very sad thing for the world and claimed it wouldn’t have happened during his administration. 

Well, this is something that should have never happened. This would not have happened during my administration, Trump said. It wouldn’t have taken place and it wouldn’t have taken place right now. 
And it’s a very sad thing for the world, for the country and it’s certainly very sad for a lot of people that are going to be needlessly killed, he added. 

The former President’s comments come a day after he hailed Russian President Vladimir Putin’s recognition of the regions of Luhansk and Donetsk, in eastern Ukraine, as an act of genius.

White House response: Asked about Trump’s initial comments on Tuesday, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said that the White House does not take advice from anyone who praises President Putin. 

Psaki added then that the Biden administration is taking a different approach from the Trump administration, adding, That’s probably why President Biden and not his predecessor was able to rally the world and the global community in taking steps against Russian aggression.

