Morphological and ecological convergence at the lower size limit for vertebrates highlighted by five new miniaturised microhylid frog species from three different Madagascan genera
Mark D. Scherz, Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing,1,2,3,* Carl R. Hutter, Investigation, Resources, Writing – review & editing,4 Andolalao Rakotoarison, Investigation, Resources, Writing – review & editing,2,5 Jana C. Riemann, Investigation, Resources, Writing – review & editing,6 Mark-Oliver Rödel, Investigation, Resources, Writing – review & editing,7 Serge H. Ndriantsoa, Investigation, Resources, Writing – review & editing,5 Julian Glos, Investigation, Resources, Writing – review & editing,6 Sam Hyde Roberts, Investigation, Resources, Writing – review & editing,8,9 Angelica Crottini, Investigation, Resources, Writing – review & editing,10 Miguel Vences, Conceptualization, Investigation, Resources, Supervision, Writing – review & editing,2 and Frank Glaw, Conceptualization, Investigation, Resources, Supervision, Writing – review & editing1
Mathew S. Crowther, Editor
Author information Article notes Copyright and License information Disclaimer
Associated Data
Supplementary Materials
Data Availability Statement
Go to:
Abstract
Miniaturised frogs form a fascinating but poorly understood amphibian ecomorph and have been exceptionally prone to taxonomic underestimation. The subfamily Cophylinae (family Microhylidae), endemic to Madagascar, has a particularly large diversity of miniaturised species which have historically been attributed to the single genus Stumpffia largely based on their small size. Recent phylogenetic work has revealed that several independent lineages of cophyline microhylids evolved towards highly miniaturised body sizes, achieving adult snout–vent lengths under 16 mm. Here, we describe five new species belonging to three clades that independently miniaturised and that are all genetically highly divergent from their relatives: (i) a new genus (Mini gen. nov.) with three new species from southern Madagascar, (ii) one species of Rhombophryne, and (iii) one species of Anodonthyla. Mini mum sp. nov. from Manombo in eastern Madagascar is one of the smallest frogs in the world, reaching an adult body size of 9.7 mm in males and 11.3 mm in females. Mini scule sp. nov. from Sainte Luce in southeastern Madagascar is slightly larger and has maxillary teeth. Mini ature sp. nov. from Andohahela in southeast Madagascar is larger than its congeners but is similar in build. Rhombophryne proportionalis sp. nov. from Tsaratanana in northern Madagascar is unique among Madagascar’s miniaturised frogs in being a proportional dwarf, exhibiting far less advanced signs of paedomorphism than other species of similar size. Anodonthyla eximia sp. nov. from Ranomafana in eastern Madagascar is distinctly smaller than any of its congeners and is secondarily terrestrial, providing evidence that miniaturisation and terrestriality may be evolutionarily linked. The evolution of body size in Madagascar’s microhylids has been more dynamic than previously understood, and future studies will hopefully shed light on the interplay between ecology and evolution of these remarkably diverse frogs.

Go to:
Introduction
Miniaturisation is a common phenomenon in amphibians [1–4], and is especially widespread and extreme in frogs [4–6]. A large proportion of the world’s smallest frogs belong to the highly diverse family Microhylidae [5–8]. Microhylid frogs exhibit high degrees of osteological variation, especially in the morphology of elements of the skull, hands, feet, and pectoral girdle [9]. The smallest species among the microhylids do not belong to a single clade however, but rather occur in various different subfamilies spread across the tropics, including New Guinea [5, 6, 8], Borneo [10, 11], South America [12, 13], and Madagascar [14, 15]. Even within single microhylid subfamilies, multiple independent instances of miniaturisation are evident from the interdigitation of miniaturised and non-miniaturised species in the respective phylogenetic trees [8, 15]. One of the best examples is the subfamily Cophylinae, endemic to Madagascar [15].

Cophylinae currently consists of 103 described species, divided across eight recognised genera. Two of the largest microhylids, Platypelis grandis and Plethodontohyla inguinalis are members of this subfamily, but it also contains frogs that are among the smallest in the world, such as Stumpffia contumelia (adult snout–vent length [SVL] 8.0–8.9 mm [14]). Historically all small to miniaturised terrestrial cophylines were placed in the genus Stumpffia, as they are superficially homogeneous in external morphology, bioacoustics, and ecology, but even early molecular phylogenetic results suggested that their diversity exceeded a single genus [16, 17]. Several lineages of cophylines have independently miniaturised, converging on a diminutive phenotype, and belonging to a number of different genus-level clades which, however, have not yet all been taxonomically named. The latest phylogenetic reconstructions [15, 18–21] have clarified this picture; Fig 1 illustrates a simplified view of the latest phylogeny of Tu et al. [20], with emphasis on previously undescribed, miniaturised lineages that do not belong to Stumpffia.

An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
Object name is pone.0213314.g001.jpg
Fig 1
Stylised representation of the latest phylogeny of the microhylid subfamily Cophylinae.
Based on the phylogenetic tree of Tu et al. [20] (reconstructed from a concatenated multi-gene DNA sequence data set) with numerous nomenclatural updates. See that paper for support values and phylogenetic context. The sister species of Rhombophryne proportionalis sp. nov. is an undescribed candidate species (R. sp. Ca7) that is not included in this phylogeny; its taxonomy will be treated elsewhere. Taxa highlighted in red are those described herein. Inset photos show a selection of the new species described herein, and representatives of the other small-bodied genera, Stumpffia and Anilany. Inset photos are not to scale.

In 2016, we highlighted three deep clades of miniaturised frogs within the Cophylinae that we considered probably distinct from Stumpffia [15]. These were: (i) ‘S.’ helenae, which we transferred to a new genus Anilany in order to preserve the monophyly of Stumpffia—this decision was challenged by Peloso et al. [22], who preferred to subsume Stumpffia, Anilany, and the generally much larger and morphologically strongly distinct Rhombophryne into a single genus, but evidence from morphology and genetics argues against this lumping approach [23]; (ii) a clade of two undescribed lineages from south-eastern Madagascar (provisionally named ‘S.’ spp. Ca15 and Ca16), originally identified by Wollenberg et al. [17], which consistently fall sister to the large-bodied Plethodontohyla—a third member of this clade, ‘S.’ sp. Ca53 was sequenced and deposited in GenBank by Rakotoarison et al. [14] and included in the phylogeny of Tu et al. [20]; and (iii) two frogs from Tsaratanana (Rhombophryne sp. Ca7 and ‘S.’ sp. Ca34), which were topologically unstable—these have since been found to fall within Rhombophryne ([20]; unpublished data), and only the latter is miniaturised, while the former is a frog of moderate-size (SVL 23.5–26.5 mm).
